---
title: "Banking"
date: 2023-04-09T18:38:43+02:00
draft: false
---
<span style="font-size:15px;">

80% of bank in lending in the US und the UK are mortgages, because the
general prosperity is raising therefore pushing up property prices in
general.

The key to understand the financial sector's strategy is that its
activities and revenue do not constitute a part of **<u>real
economic</u>** growth, but a subtrahend paid out of the
economic surplus.

Most of the wealth for families has stemmed from the debt-leveraged
price of their homes. Because financialization has created an enormous
rise in the value of assets on nations' balance sheets. The motivation
has been less to earn a profit on tangible capital investment than to
generate "capital" gains.

The secular rise of debt service absorbs the economic surplus diverting
spending away from the purchase of goods and services (real economy).

Paying debt service to bankers and bondholders leaves less income
available to spend on goods and services. So debt deflation is today's
major problem, not inflation.

By 2008 banks were giving out zero-down-payment mortgages with no
amortization, "interest only" loans. Until 1980s, most bank guidelines
called for housing costs not to absorb more than a quarter of the
debtor's income.

Interest is treated as "profit" earned by bankers' product: the debt
taken on by borrowers. Treating the banks' privileged of credit creation
as tangible industrial investment conflates money and credit as a
"factor of production", so that interest, penalties and fees appear as
part of the production process, not external to it. ***Credit creation
for GDP, consumption or assets purchases...***

Debt monetization by the government (i.e., Ireland) requires more public
taxes in order to service such debt. So fiscal austerity on top of
financial austerity. Squeezing out more to pay the bondholder resulting
in a shrinkage of the economy.

Instead of re-capitalize the economy and monetizing federal debt like
the Bank of England and the Fed did, they ECB demands that debt-strapped
countries add a tax burden to the debt overhead, so as to limit the
budget deficit while creating a hemorrhage of bank subsidies.

Sell-offs of public monopolies such as roads and other infrastructure
are turned into opportunities for rent extraction.

Socialist who tell the rhetoric of class war between labor and industry
miss the threat to labor and industry posed by banks and rentiers of the
FIRE sectors and monopolies, financialization.

## Two traditions of financial doctrine 

Today's leading nations have achieved their global advantage as a result
of a strategy based on industrial and agricultural innovation employing
well educated, highly paid, highly productive labor. A tradition whose
roots extend back to before the Industrial Revolution has advocated
public infrastructure investment, subsidies to key industries, and
encouragement to skilled immigrants, as well as protectionist economic
policy. This tradition has called for government money and control of
finance to steer money and credit creation to promote tangible capital
investments \[Japan window guidance\].

-   The combination of fiscal policy and bank regulation determines the
    volume of credit and how savings are recycled, overshadowing labor
    costs in determining international trade competition.

</span>